
Project Report: Daily Task Organizer (DTO)
Submitted By:

Name: SUNKU VENKATA SAI DEEPAK

Registration number: 25BAI10164

 Project Repository URL:

https://github.com/[your-github-username]/daily-task-organizer

Date of Submission:
31 MARCH 2026

1. Executive Summary
The Daily Task Organizer (DTO) is a simple, command-line interface (CLI) application developed in Python. It serves as a personal productivity tool that allows users to create, view, manage, and persistently store their daily tasks in a local text-based database. This project was developed as part of the flipped course requirements to demonstrate fundamental computing science concepts—specifically File I/O, data structure manipulation, and exception handling—within a functional and real-world context.

2. Problem Statement and Relevance
The Problem
In today's fast-paced environment, individuals often struggle to manage short-term responsibilities, leading to missed deadlines and increased stress. Common solutions involve either complex project management software that is over-engineered for daily needs or temporary physical notes that are easily lost. There is a need for a minimalist, intuitive, and persistent digital solution for tracking daily tasks without the overhead of a graphical user interface (GUI).

 Problem Relevance
This problem is highly relevant to students and professionals alike who require a low-friction method to organize their immediate priorities. By implementing a digital checklist, this project addresses the need for structured productivity. Furthermore, the development of a persistent, text-based solution demonstrates how simple software can effectively solve common organizational challenges.

3. Implementation Depth and Methodology
 System Architecture
The DTO is a single-script Python application (dto.py) that operates entirely within the terminal. It utilizes a text file (tasks.txt) as a persistent storage layer.

Key Components:

Storage (tasks.txt): A text file where each line represents one task. Incomplete tasks are prefixed with [ ], and completed tasks are prefixed with [x].

Application Logic (dto.py): The main script, organized functionally:

Data Access Layer: Functions (load_tasks, save_tasks) handle all interactions with the text file.

Core Functions: Functions (add_task, view_tasks, complete_task, delete_task) implement the application's features (CRUD operations).

User Interface (CLI): The main() function implements a while loop to provide a continuous text-based menu for user interaction.

 Detailed Implementation Analysis
Persistence (File I/O):

The load_tasks() function uses the standard library's open() function in read ('r') mode within a with statement, ensuring robust resource management. It reads the file line-by-line, populating an in-memory List.

The save_tasks() function operates in write ('w') mode, overwriting the entire file with the current in-memory List every time a task is added, updated, or deleted. This design choice ensures data persistence after the application closes.

Exception Handling:

A critical aspect of the implementation depth is robust error management. The application uses try...except blocks in multiple locations. For example, in complete_task() and delete_task(), a ValueError is caught if the user enters a non-numeric value for a task ID, and an general Exception block ensures the application provides a friendly error message and returns to the menu rather than crashing.

4. Syllabus Coverage: Demonstrable Application of Course Concepts
This project was designed specifically to demonstrate proficiency in core course concepts.

 Concept 1: File Input/Output (I/O)
The core of this project is data persistence using File I/O.

Demonstration: In load_tasks(), the code demonstrates reading from a file (f.read()), while in save_tasks(), it demonstrates writing to a file (f.write()). This addresses the course learning objective of understanding how software interacts with non-volatile storage.

 Concept 2: Data Structures (Lists)
An in-memory List is used as the primary data structure to manage tasks during runtime.

Demonstration: The script demonstrates fundamental list operations: appending items (tasks.append()), accessing items by index (tasks[task_index]), and removing items (tasks.pop(task_index)). This demonstrates proficiency in manipulating basic linear data structures.

 Concept 3: Exception Handling (try...except)
The application implements robust Exception Handling to manage potential runtime errors and user input issues.

Demonstration: The script handles a specific FileNotFoundError in load_tasks(), allowing the application to initialize gracefully on the first run. It also handles ValueError in the CLI logic to ensure the application does not crash if a user enters invalid numeric input (e.g., typing 'a' instead of '1'). This shows application of defensive programming principles.
4. Concept 4: Control Flow and Iteration
The CLI uses standard Control Flow mechanisms (loops and conditional logic).

Demonstration: The main() function employs a non-terminating while True loop to create a persistent menu. Branching logic is handled using a standard if...elif...else structure to process user input. Iteration is demonstrated in view_tasks() using the enumerate() function to display list contents with numeric identifiers.

5. Project Executability and Usage
The DTO is fully executable via the command line, fulfilling the project requirement.

How to Run
Prerequisites: Python 3.6+ installed.

Execution: From the terminal, run:

Bash
python dto.py
 Example Usage Flow
Upon execution, the main menu is displayed. A typical session involves:

Selecting 1 to Add several tasks (e.g., "Review Syllabus," "Setup GitHub Repo").

Selecting 2 to View the current checklist.

Selecting 3 to Complete task #1 (e.g., after the syllabus is reviewed).

Selecting 2 to View the updated list, showing 1. [x] Review Syllabus.

Selecting 5 to Exit the application.

A sample tasks.txt file is generated automatically on the first run, demonstrating persistent data handling.

6. Conclusion and Future Work
The Daily Task Organizer successfully meets all parameters defined in the BYOP evaluation framework. It is a functional, command-line executable application that directly addresses a relevant productivity problem while demonstrating proficiency in key computing science syllabus concepts (File I/O, Lists, and Exception Handling). The methodology of using functions to compartmentalize logic and standard standard libraries for implementation depth has resulted in a clean, maintainable, and reliable codebase.

Future iterations of this project could explore enhancing the functionality by introducing due dates using Python's datetime module or implementing a simple search feature to demonstration string matching concepts. However, in its current form, the DTO stands as a robust example of foundational programming and software design principles.
